proof
The length of  is the number of leaves of the derivation tree.
Deleting the terminal nodes does not change the number of leaves but decreases the depth of the tree by one.
A full binary tree of depth  has at most  leaves.
proof

proof[Proof of Theorem thm:PumpCFL]
Let  be a grammar in Chomsky form generating the language .
Put , where  is the number of variables in .
We will show that this  satisfies the conditions of the pumping lemma.

Let  be such that , and let  be any derivation tree for .
By Lemma lem:ChomskyTree,  contains a path of length at least .
This path contains at least  vertices.
The last vertex of the path is labeled by a terminal, all of the other vertices are labeled by variables.
Hence there is a variable that appears on this path at least twice.

Take any of the longest paths in  and, ascending it from the leaf, find the first repetition of variables.
This gives us two vertices  and  such that
enumerate
 and  have the same label, say ;
 is closer to the root than ;
the portion of the path from  to the leaf has length at most .
enumerate

The subtree  with the root  represents a derivation from  of a word  which is a subword of  and has length at most .
Indeed, the portion of our path from  down to the leaf has length at most , and there is no longer path starting from 
because we have chosen a longest path.


figure[ht]
center

center
Proof of the pumping lemma for CFLs: structuring a word.
fig:PumpCFL1
figure

The tree  contains a subtree  growing from .
This subtree derives from  a word  which is a subword of :

z' = vwx,

see Figure fig:PumpCFL1.
The words  and  cannot both be , because  has two children, only one of which is an ancestor of ,
so that the other child generates a subword of  disjoint from .

To summarize, we have

S []* uAy, []* vAx, A []* w.

It follows that  and  for all .
A derivation tree for  can be obtained from the tree  by cut, copy, and paste, see Figure fig:PumpCFL2.
proof

figure[ht]
center
PumpCFL2.pdf
center
Proof of the pumping lemma for CFLs: pumping a word. These trees represent the words  and  respectively.
fig:PumpCFL2
figure

