In particular, if , then the above theorem provides a necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of a perfect matching.
proof
Assume there is a matching that covers all of .
This defines an injective map  associating to every  its matched vertex in .
For every subset  we have , hence .
Thus condition eqn:Hall is necessary.

Let us show that it is sufficient.
Let  be a maximum matching of .
Suppose that  does not cover ; we will prove that eqn:Hall is violated.
Take a vertex  unmatched by  and consider all alternating paths starting from .
All these paths start with non--edges.

There are alternating paths of two sorts.
Those made of an even number of edges end in .
Denote the set of their endpoints by .
(We have , because we also consider the path of zero length starting and ending at .)
Alternating paths made of an odd number of edges end in .
Denote the set of their endpoints by .
See Figure fig:HallProof.

figure[ht]
center

center
To the proof of Theorem thm:Hall.
fig:HallProof
figure

We now prove a series of claims.

Claim 1. Every vertex  other than  is matched to a vertex in .
Indeed,  is the endpoint of a non-trival alternating path  of even length.
The last edge of  belongs to , thus  is matched to some vertex .
We have , because  is the endpoint of an alternating path .

Claim 2. Every vertex  is matched to a vertex in .
Assume that some  is not matched.
Then the alternating path  from  to  is an augmenting path, which contradicts the assumption of maximality of .
If  is matched to , then the path  is also an augmenting path, thus .

Claim 3. .
Indeed, by the previous two claims the matching  establishes a bijection between  and .

Claim 4. .
Every edge incident to  is a length  alternating path.
Thus all neighbors of  belong to .
Let  be an edge incident to , .
If  belongs to , then its other endpoint is in  by Claim 1.
If  does not belong to , then it extends an alternating path ending in , thus again ends in .
This proves .
We have  by construction of  and : every vertex  is the endpoint of an alternating path starting at .
Just before coming to , this path visited a vertex in .

It follows that , which violates eqn:Hall.
Thus the assumption that a maximum matching does not cover all of  was false, and the theorem is proved.
proof

