Predicate logic
Introduction
Predicate logic is a more complicated and powerful system than the propositional logic.

Before proceeding to formal definitions, let us have a glimpse at how it works.
Consider the statement
quote
For every number  one has .
quote
It can be expressed by a predicate formula
equation
eqn:PredForm
x P(x, f(x)),
equation
where , and  means .
Functions of one or several arguments that take truth values (such as  or " is blue") are called predicates.
Formula eqn:PredForm contains all the main building blocks of the predicate logic: a variable , a function , and a predicate .

Let us now forget the origin of formula eqn:PredForm.
In order to make sense of it, its elements must be interpreted:
what kind of objects are represented by the variable , how is the function  defined, and what does  mean.
This interpretation can be as above, but can also be different.
For example, the same formula can be interpreted as
quote
It gets colder every day.
quote
Now  is a day,  is the day after day , and  means " is colder than ".

Our first interpretation evaluates the formula eqn:PredForm to true, while the second evaluates it to false.
A formula of the predicate logic is valid if it evaluates to true in all interpretations.
Similarly to the propositional logic, one aims at finding a method (a proof theory) to establish the validity of a formula.



Syntax and semantics of predicate logic
First-order languages
The alphabet of the predicate logic consists of
itemize
variables;
function symbols;
predicate symbols;
logical connectives ;
auxiliary symbols  and ;
equality symbol .
itemize

Informally speaking (and as indicated in the introduction), a variable is an object,
a function is an operation with objects whose result is also an object,
and a predicate is a statement about one or several object (in other words, an operation with objects whose result is a truth value).

Compared to the propositional logic, we have two new logical connectives:
the universal quantifier  and the existential quantifier .

The equality symbol is not always included in the alphabet.
Accordingly, there are two slightly different versions of predicate logic: logic with equality and logic without equality.

Before stating the rules according to which the alphabet symbols can be combined one has to fix a signature.
This is a list of function symbols and predicate symbols together with the number of arguments for each of them.
