proof
We will construct a matching on the set of partitions into distinct summands
such that partitions with an even number of summands are matched to partitions with an odd number of summands.
For  different from  this matching will be perfect,
and for  exactly one partition will remain unmatched.

For every partition  denote by  the size of its smallest part.
By  denote the number of consecutive parts of  starting with the largest part.
On the Ferrers diagram,  is the length of the last row,
and  is the length of the diagonal starting from the top right dot (let us call it the rightmost diagonal),
see Figure fig:IandJ.

figure[ht]
center

center
Definition of  and .
fig:IandJ
figure

Take a partition  with  and look at its diagram.
Construct a new diagram by removing the last row and adding a dot to each of the first  rows.
(In other words, move the last row so that it becomes a new rightmost diagonal.)
This yields a new partition  with  (because the new rightmost diagonal is the old last row)
and  (because the new last row is longer than the old one).
In particular, .
See Figure fig:PentaMatching.

figure[ht]
center
PentaMatching
center
Transforming a -partition into a -partition.
fig:PentaMatching
figure

This is an (almost) perfect matching between partitions with  and partitions with .
Indeed, the above transformation is (almost always) invertible:
take a partition with  and move its rightmost diagonal to the bottom so that it becomes the new last row.

Also, this matching fulfills our needs: when the last row is moved, the number of parts changes by ,
so that partitions with an even number of parts are matched to partitions with an odd number of parts.

Why is it only almost perfect?
The transformation of a -partition into a -partition is not going to work if  and the last row intersects the rightmost diagonal
(in this case the new rightmost diagonal will "stick out").
A partition with this property looks as shown on Figure fig:FerrersPenta, left.
Thus it is only possible for .
The inverse transformation of a -partition into a -partition will not work
if  and the last row intersects the rightmost diagonal
(in this case after the transformation the two last rows have equal length, so the partition does not have distinct parts).
Such partitions look as shown on Figure fig:FerrersPenta, right, and are only possible for .

The "lonely" partition has  rows.
Thus if  is even, then there is one even partition more than odd,
and if  is odd, then there is one odd partition more than even.
proof




